We are in New Zealand and we can see you there, Danette. Welcome to the Select Committee.
Look, you have five minutes with us, so we'll hand it over to you to talk us through your submission.
Thank you. Thank you. So, Tēnā koutou katoa. Thank you for the opportunity to speak.
My name is Jeheta Danette Wedderter. I'm representing the Animal Justice Party
Aotearoa, New Zealand. We are a political party committed to advocating for the
rights, welfare and protection of animals. So we oppose the Environment Disestablishment
Amendment Bill, but firstly, I will acknowledge the government's intent to make improvements
across housing, infrastructure and the environment. They genuinely do have complex
challenges and integrated thinking does have real value. So this proposal is just not
an administration restructure. It is a decision about how environmental protection
is prioritised within government and whether it remains a clear, independent voice.
So removing that independence and placing those responsibilities within the broader ministry
does create tension. Addressing housing and infrastructure challenges cannot come at
the expense of environmental protection. So you're asking the same ministry to build the
motorway and protect the wetlands that the motorway destroys. That's not coordination,
that's a conflict of interest written into an org chart. These portfolios are not neutral. They are
among the primary drivers of habitat destruction, freshwater and ecosystem decline.
So the government has suggested that this change will improve coordination.
However, coordination already occurs and can be strengthened with process.
So disestablishing a dedicated ministry is not required to achieve that.
As an experienced senior leader, a cannabis structural change does cost time and a lot of
money and doesn't fix problems. I recommend identifying the root cause of the issues and
providing solutions to address them. Now, importantly, environmental protection
and animal welfare are inseparable. So animals rely on stable ecosystems for survival. That's
their food, shelter, breeding and safety. And when these systems are weakened, it's
animals who pay the price. We've already seen this. Aotearoa is facing ongoing biodiversity loss
and environmental pressure. And globally, we know that ecosystem decline is one of the leading
drivers of species decline. And there are broader implications. So New Zealand's reputation
is tightly close to how our environment, how we care for our environment. And that reputation
underpins trust in our clean green billion dollar image. Equally important is accountability.
So a standalone ministry provides a clear line of responsibility when things go wrong.
So 70% of freshwater fish are threatened with extinction or at risk. 78% of native lamb birds
and 93% of native frogs and 94% of native reptiles are threatened or at risk.
Nearly half of our monitored river sites fail to meet E. coli safe drinking water standards.
And half of our lakes are in poor or degraded health due to nutrient contamination.
The ministry has been responsible for bringing this kind of clear evidence-based reporting to light.
And when that voice is absorbed, there is a real risk of this level of transparency and
visibility being diminished over time. So we urge you to protect this proposal. And instead
of broad structural change, the focus should be on targeted practical improvements that strengthen
environmental outcomes. We have a responsibility to do better. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Dineet, for your submission. Appreciate your time. It appears we have no
questions, but we have got your written submission as well. It's very clear submission.
Yeah, very clear, very passionate. So we appreciate your time this morning. Thank you.
Please, Kia ora.
Kia ora. So we will now move to Ginny Easton,
who I believe is joining us. Oh, there we go. Ginny, we can see you there. Welcome to the
select committee this morning. Look, you've got five minutes with us. So in the next
time, we'll hand it over to you to talk us through your submission.
Thank you. I began my written submission by explaining how important MFE's technical
knowledge, independent voice and international standing were for me, a resource scientist
with Tasman District Council, which is a small unitary authority, covering mainly rural land
and the raft of complex contaminated historic sites. MFE scientists established the contaminated
sites remediation fund for the cleanup of the Mapua fruit grows chemical site. They also provided
nationwide technical advice across and access to high temperature incineration in France through
the Basel Convention for the disposal of hazardous waste such as DDT, dealdron, PCBs,
from the redundant agrochemical collection. And without this technical support from MFE,
farmers and industries would not have supported the strive by councils to remove toxic waste
for liability issues. The parameters for environmental reporting are complex.
Ozone bioprotection, waste minimization, all require special technical knowledge which
is provided by MFE staff. Now a question, would this still be available if MFE staff were buried
inside a mega ministry? And I seriously doubt that for the following reasons. A well funded
standalone ministry has a louder, stronger, more authoritative voice and it can take
environmental concerns to the cabinet table. And this makes it possible to recruit and retain
high quality staff and preserve the status of the ministry, build institutional knowledge
and with the status and professional relationships have access to overseas experts for the emerging
issues. Those unknowns which are arriving here soon. And this status and manner will be lost
if the secretary for the environment functions are given to the CEO of the mega ministry.
And then there's the climate work. The staff at MFE already have a battle to provide advice
and policies to meet our climate responsibilities for emission reduction. When the climate
commission's advice is not accepted and the ETS has been ordered in such a way it's no longer
effective. We need to move to a low carbon economy and protect the carbon sinks and we need the
ministry staff to guide us. Work on climate adaptation plan is very complex and politically
challenging and with the process and with the actual process of merging the ministry that will
take the staff's focus away from these projects and without a clear national directive.
Local and central government staff are managing the recovery from climatic weather events in a
very ad hoc manner. And as you know this is unsustainable. It's very expensive and it's
inherently unfair. MFE is far too important for our future to merge and weaken its voice for nature
and our physical and natural environment. We need its independent oversight to support,
protect and improve our economy and well-being. And as a last note I hope that the NEB and
planning bills are changed to include a goal for emission reduction targets, goals and plans under
the Climate Change Response Act 2002. If this doesn't happen the role of MFE will be even more
challenging and difficult. If they're part of a mega ministry where their voice will be diluted
as they compete with transport and urban development that are finished.
Thank you very much Jenny for your submission today. We appreciate your time and the effort that
you've made to provide that submission. So thank you, thank you very much. Thank you. It's very helpful.
Very helpful. Good point about the screening.
Thank you. Thank you Jenny. So now we'll move on to our next submission today, Bruce Gilkerson.
So we've just got Bruce popping up. There we go. Bruce, welcome to the select committee this morning.
You have five minutes with us so we'll hand it over to you to open up with some opening
remarks and talk you through your submission. Talk us through your submission. We just got
something to share with us there. Yes, brilliant. Thank you. Over to you. Okay, here and thank you
very much. I am with Paul Martin. So my background is in business and accounting.
His is in health and disability and he'll speak if I get tongue tied. We will say we
disagree with the establishment proposal but if that is to proceed we will have some
suggestions in relation to how that option might be improved. So that's the second slide we're
looking at there. I also do some research and writing on environmental issues mainly for
chartered accountants in New Zealand and Australia for their monthly journal. The image is an early
involvement from 26 years ago. I've included it here for the strong cross-party support it
attracted. It was launched by Sir Jeffrey Palmer and included a foreword from Simon Upton who was
then Minister for the Environment. I'm pleased to say that climate and nature are now a central
focus for chartered accountants Australia and New Zealand. Next slide please. Talking about urgency,
this is the planetary boundaries framework which many of you will be familiar with,
largely developed by scientists at the Stockholm Resilience Centre. Seven of the nine
safe global limits have now been transgressed so it's urgent. Climate is one of the
boundaries despite some progress recently the rate of emissions globally is still
speeding up. A few comments as we now know the past 11 years are the hottest on record.
Everything is connected some impacts cause feedback loops resulting in further damage
elsewhere. So heat can lead to forest fires and dieback which releases carbon which leads to more
heat. Limits once breached can be irreversible and meanwhile every fraction of a of a degree
really matters. Next the globally trusted UK based institute and faculty of actuaries
using methods tried and trusted to manage and advise on trillions of dollars in pensions,
investments and insurance has concluded that risks to planetary solvency have been hugely
underestimated and that without rapid action on climate and environmental risks the global
economy could face a 50% loss in GDP and yes that's 50% between 2070 and 2090. So they're
saying it's even worse than we thought sorry and that better information clear limits and better
policies are urgently needed everywhere. The report is a call to action and is highly recommended. Next
please. Here I'm saying that extra costs to retain MFE's independence and I don't know what they
are or indeed what the benefits are will be hugely offset by environmental
and other benefits. So first there is ample evidence of potential gains and I focused here
mainly on dollars not just on environmental benefits. Here are two sources for now.
Modeling by Deloitte's New Zealand showed that decisive climate action could add
64 billion to our economy by 2050 and a report from the Sustainable Business Council
and Climate Leaders Coalition this week shows that climate friendly technology could see GDP grow
by 22 billion per year by 2035. It could also help prevent declines in agriculture and tourism
revenue. Some other benefits I've noted here are savings from mitigating and preparing wisely for
future climate damage avoiding possible reputational damage and risks to free trade agreements from
inadequate emissions progress and avoiding some future significant health costs. For each of
those it's better and cheaper to protect something rather than try to fix it later.
MFE's independence expertise clearly a purpose and ability to act and advise transparently
available and needed like never before. Slide please. I'm wondering if MFE is to merge is
the new ministry the right place for it and I'm just looking at impacts and benefits from
two major two major blocks. So question is where could that expertise provide most benefit
and on this basis though I'm not recommending this there could potentially be greater benefits
in aligning with the latter. I consider that the merger should certainly proceed but without MFE
and at least not with more detailed research into the benefits and risks for current
and future New Zealanders. Slide please. This one's a bit flippant but I'm just talking about the
the benefits of having a independent an independent voice so
yeah rather than have be the an environment agency in one section but to better to act
transparently to be able to advise encourage and guide all sectors and particularly those which
are larger matters have significant impacts or are presenting major opportunities for progress and
better outcomes. Next please. I mentioned the heading which probably should have been
headed items to be addressed if the bill proceeds and if we do this how do we make
sure that nothing gets lost rather than the heading amendments because some of these are
outside the bill itself for instance some items are covered by the rma reforms currently underway.
The focus on the status of the secretary for the environment's role in the priority of MFE is
increasingly urgent climate and environmental responsibilities are key concerns. It's
crucial that nothing diminishes or detracts from these and there be no loss of momentum
which through what could be a turbulent period if the full merger were to occur as proposed
as noted I consider that the retention of MFE as an independent ministry is likely to bring
about far better outcomes for people on planet. And final slide please.
With that one looks as if it got lost a bit at the top there but with multiple and escalating
impacts now inevitable this is the wrong time to risk weakening a clear and focused and independent
voice for the environment. I consider that even with some refinement on the proposal unless
compelling evidence is available to the contrary a change at this stage could result in disruption
dilution and diminished transparency. Meanwhile retaining and bolstering this voice in my view
is the best way to mitigate and prepare for negative impacts and to plan for NC's significant future
opportunities. New Zealanders current and future love and depend on their natural environment
for their livelihoods and their well-being. Please support them. We welcome any questions.
Thank you Bruce and thank you for those slides that's really useful and helpful.
Look we've got a couple of questions um we'll go to Priyanka first.
Thank you thanks Bruce um I've just got a quick question seeking clarification around
the first amendment that you have suggested to explicitly prioritize environment protection
as a primary function if this merger were to go ahead. Other submitters have made the point
that they feel that even though the bill as it stands says that all the functions would transfer
over to the new ministry that the focus on the natural environment might fall away
as a result. So presumably you are talking about prioritizing both the natural and built
environments in that amendment that you've suggested?
Yes um I wanted to make sure that it's it's um uh it's protected and bolstered. There are a lot of
threats coming the the next few years are going to be um perhaps quite too moltuous
and certainly not wanting anything to be lost there. Thank you. Thank you and Rachel Brookham.
Oh yes just a quick question thank you um for the history and for your involvement all that time ago.
Um and you're I'm interested in the international experience you have and you've just said
I believe it is just a matter of time before we are challenged by countries and producers
which are now far more environmentally focused than we are. What what countries do you think are far
more environmentally focused now than New Zealanders?
Yes I'm probably referring there to to to UK and EU which if certainly they have a strong focus for
instance in our free trade agreements on not backing off on on climate progress and I think it could
perhaps farmers in those areas might might raise concerns um and yeah I think any any further
changes there could put us at risk. Thank you. William well thank you very much Bruce we've
met time there with our submissions this morning but we appreciate your time and the um the really
insightful useful submissions so thank you. Thank you. Like the pictures the pictures of the all
blacks in the I don't know if we won that one yeah thank you. I thought it was going to be that game
with France. Oh yes. So moving on to our next submission this morning uh Environment and
Conservation Organisations of Aotearoa New Zealand.
Who are also joining us online and hopefully popping through shortly.
There we go we can oh there you can see you there Barry welcome to the select committee this afternoon
look you have 10 minutes with us so we'll hand it over to you to talk us through your submission
and then we'll open up for a few questions. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you to the
committee um to um present uh this our submission um I'm assuming you've had a
read our submission already I introduced myself I'm Barry Weber I'm the chairperson of the Environment
Conservation Organisations um as you've seen in our submission AECO's had a long history
and involvement in this area we were involved in advocacy for the establishment of the
ministry for the environment back in the 1980s but for those who don't know that came out of
the Environment Forum which was established in 1985 where a number of issues clearly
identified with the lack of environmental priority of the governments at that stage
and the failures that the think big projects had occurred um and the costs and losses that
were associated with that with those projects on the environment. In addition the lack of focus um
on environmental issues generally and the idea that we need to bring in together all the
different green dots in the different agencies at the time and the commission for the environment
as it then was was only a agency with a cabinet minute that didn't have any statutory functions
or you know statutory basis for its decision making um so the Environment Act was a really
important part of that and I should note that this is the 40th year of the Environment Act
that was it was passed in December of 1986 so the Ministry for the Environment uh if it still
exists at the end of the year would have reached its 40th year so that's I think it's important
milestone in environment policy in New Zealand that we should not forget. So we're concerned about
the lack of environmental focus you've heard from other submitters this morning about that and
we're concerned about the lack of environmental focus of the government generally and the need
for recognition that the environment is a key important part of the uh of of New Zealand
in terms of our loss of biodiversity our state of the environment which is declining and we need
to have a lot greater focus on it and we're concerned that this piece of legislation would make and
weaken that environmental focus. We'll also note that yesterday the government released its
priorities for a science funding which also shows a huge reduction in environmental science funding
and again that doesn't augur well for the future of New Zealand's environment or
the making the government and other agencies making clear decisions on the environment because
science funding is a key part of that equation. We're also concerned that we're talking about
this currently talking about this bill but the new position has been appointed the
head of corrections has been appointed to this position of running an agency which parliament
is yet to pass legislation to enforce so it's a bit of an odd way of doing things and we hope
that this is an open and transparent process that parliament is going through and the executive
is an overriding parliamentary it's parliamentary mandate in that process. We're also concerned
that the cabinet papers associated with this document and this decision are heavily redacted
and I don't know where the parliament itself has actually looked at the full detail of those
cabinet papers or asked for copies of the unredacted copies of those papers that were released
and we urge the select committee to ask for those papers so that they can review all the
documentation and the reasons for the decisions being made. The other problem is that the
legislation itself misses part of the role of the ministry for the environment in different
agencies. I haven't mentioned to it but I would suggest that the drafters look at the
Fisheries Act for example as one as one led piece of legislation which mentions the ministry for
the environment which isn't included and so there are there are potentially other examples
we haven't looked through the full details but there clearly the drafters of this bill was
done in a hurry without clear thought and consideration of all the references to
the environment agency in different pieces of legislation. We're concerned about the
transparency of advice that will be with this new agency. We've seen in other agencies where
there's been accumulation of different ministries for example ministry for primary industry we've
noticed the lack of transparency in terms of some fisheries advice and the way that occurs
within an agency and the sort of priorities for funding within that agency so it's really
important that whatever comes out of this process that there's clear transparency between the
different parts if it is combined the different parts of the agency so we can see where officials
disagree or officials agree and what priorities different parts of the agency have especially
when they're being acting under different statutes. That's a sort of a sort of clear
summary of our submission we don't support this bill we urge the select committee to
not to pass not to recommend this bill be passed and that in fact that we move forward and
reconsider the role of the ministry for the environment in the future. Thank you chair and
happy to answer any questions that the committee may have in regard to our submission thanks.
Thank you Barry we'll go first to Rachel Brokking. Yeah thanks Barry and thanks for
reminding us of nationals blueprint cleaning up fresh water and the like. I often go back
to that document it does seem rather inconsistent with everything that we've seen before this
committee this term but my question for you is more specifically on seven where you talk about
when the Environment Act was passed that there was supposed to be environmental impact assessment
provisions and where you see that best sitting into all of the environmental scheme also noting
that we've got the planning bill and the natural environment bill in front of us too. Well I don't
know whether the select committee have heard of the environmental protection and enhancement
procedures probably not they were established in the late 70s and revised during the 80s
they were wider than environmental assessment for projects they had had had provisions for
assessment of policies and actions of agencies rather than just actual consent conditions
so while the resource management act might be argued replace some of those provisions of
the environmental protection enhancement procedures not all the provisions of those
procedures were replaced and I'd urge the select committee to get yourself a copy of the EPNEP
procedures I'm assuming that they'll be in parliamentary library
they're not something that you can find online I actually looked online to see whether I could
find them but you can't these days they're actually a very forward looking piece of
document they were originally produced under the national government in the Muldoon years
and were revised later on through through the 1980s and the original intention of the Environment
Act was that basically part three of the Environment Act would contain the environmental
protection enhancement procedures but that never occurred there was never despite
earlier decisions by cabinet to do that that was never proceeded with and I think that's a great
admission because as I said the Resource Management Act and other legislation only
for full full part of the provisions that the EPNEP procedures actually covered thanks
thank you thank you very much Barry we appreciate your submission today and your insights lots
of considerations to take into account there so thank you very much thank you thank you
thank you committee look forward to your decisions thanks
so now we move on to our next submitter the Pirirako Tribal Authority
who are here with us in person welcome welcome to the select committee this afternoon now
look you've got 10 minutes with us but take your submission as read and if you'd like to
just talk us three main points and then we'll open up for a few questions so over to you
thank you
I'm speaking on behalf of Pirirako Tribal Authority
of Val Kaihautu
for generations Pirirako hapu have been a kaitaki of our
here in the west of may of plenty and our connection with the whenua with our waters
is more than just cultural this is fundamental to our very identity and survival so I'm here
to be confirmed opposition to the environment this establishment of the Ministry of the
Environment Amendment Bill review this bill not just as a bureaucratic reshuffle as has
been suggested but as a direct calculated attack on Maori rights and the protection of
Aotearoa's greatest asset our natural environment. Tuatahiaki the bill is in breach of Article 2 of
the Treaty of Waitangi which guarantees us Tino Rangatiratanga over our taonga more specifically
to us of the Pirirako the bill threatens to hollow out the Ngāhapū o Ngāti Ranginui claims
Settlement Act 2025 that settlement was quote a living promise from the government on behalf
of the Crown to acknowledge the past wrongs and protect our taonga for future generations the Crown
apologised for the unjust confiscation of our lands and promised a new relationship based
on mutual trust yet here we are less than a year later watching the government unilaterally
without any external consultation with treaty partners getting ready to dismantle the very
agency responsible for upholding those relationships and protecting the after mentioned taonga a
commitment made must be a commitment kept you can't deliver on treaty settlements if you scatter
the expertise and relationships required to honour them we question the logic of merging
ministries that appear to have minimal intersecting areas of mutual alignment we also question the
sense and value of having a mega ministry in the first place these are entities keeping a mind
that are tasked with overseeing the most important areas in our society throwing them
together to make a mega ministry seems like a knee jerk reaction to save money in the short term
when speaking of the justification of the merge of several ministries I've seen terms like
improve coordination be used terms like align policy making across sectors terms like reduce
duplication and bureaucracy this is political speak for downsizing downsizing several different
areas into one in this case ministries results always in a dilution of expertise and ultimately
a reduction in financial support we can't do that for the environment it's too important
to do that
having priorities such as economic development and environmental protections competing with each
other within the same ministry weakens the environment of both of them
and while we speak of economic development and financial responsibility defunding and
deprioritizing the environment doesn't save us money in the long term it just pushes the
bill that we all ultimately have to pay down the road for example cyclone Gabrielle needed
over 10 billion dollars of financial support for resilience and recovery the earthquakes and
kai kota billions of dollars needed for recovery and resilience the 2023 floods in Auckland billions
of dollars needed for recovery and resilience and those are just some examples we live within
the ecosystem here in Altaroa that is heavily reliant on meat exports dairy exports fruit
exports that need a functioning not collapsing environment tourism agriculture fisheries
depend entirely on clean water and a healthy environment
for us a pediraco water culture is a major source of income and worry about what the
space will look like in the absence of proactive environmental leadership from our government
and from our ministries saving millions now was to only cost us billions later to me
it's not sound economic strategy it's physically irresponsible
and there's much more at stake here of course than just money
we enter pediraco we share our space with the moana and there's grave concern for our urupaa
and our people in the case of a major weather event
I am the environment the environment is me this proverb doesn't only encapsulate the relationship
Maori have with the environment but also a pathway forward where we can both thrive
and so I'll conclude my portal with the question of the government
finds itself in this situation pushing against long-term sustainability pushing against
environmental protections and pushing against long-term economic sound decision making
then I will question the wisdom of that position and I will just conclude by saying
the pediraco tribal authority stand in opposition of this bill
thank you very much we've got a question from Cameron Luxton yeah thank you
you too um I've got a question you talked about
saying quote was um it's hollowing out the Nati Dunginui Kirao settlement bill um the relationship
with the crown like is the settlement with the crown or the ministry because I look through this
yeah so looking through the settlement bill there's no mention of ministry for the environment
but the ministry of the environment is the entity that oversees and ultimately
looks after the protections and that relationship or diminishing of the ministry in our view
ultimately results in the diminishing of the environment which is where that conflict occurs
so would the crown ever be able to change the makeup of ministries
and not breach the Nati Dunginui settlement bill
of course but this is ultimately again as we said ultimately this bill will result and as I said
a dilution of expertise and a reduction of funds for the environment and that has an impact
yeah so it's up coming to me on this point so I think your point is can we the question is
am I am I all wrong with what I'm saying is that all these issues on your back page here at your bill
go to the diminishment of environmental protections and it is because of that
as a consequence of the MFE um being abolished that go to your that go to your settlement issue
is that is that right the ultimate point is that a diminishing of the ministry diminishes
the capabilities to look after the environment and by diminishing the capabilities to look
after the environment and our ability to look after our time that ultimately is the conflict
yeah which is much more eloquently put than my question thank you thank you very much for your
time today appreciate your submission and and your passion um as well so thank you
a lot of that and so we now call our next submitter wwf new zealand who are also here
and joining us in person today welcome to this select committee this afternoon you have
five minutes with us and so we'll just hand it over to you to open up and talk us through
your submission and then we'll have hopefully a few questions great kere kouta thank you for
the opportunity to speak to you all today um i'm jamie fowler and the conservation impact
manager at wwf new zealand and i'm here with lily and fujer the principle policy advisor
and we understand that the spell doesn't change the core functions of the ministry for the
environment but we are concerned about how those functions will operate inside a much broader
new ministry bringing environment together with strong development housing transport and
infrastructure mandates risks creating built-in conflicts that could weaken the ministry's
ability to carry out its core environmental protection role new zealand's biodiversity is already
in crisis um with some of the highest rates of extinction in the world driven by habitat loss
pollution and cumulative impacts the ministry for the environment currently provides essential
safeguards for nature those safeguards cannot be diluted by competing goals like road construction
or urban expansion as we know nature underpins our health our well-being our climate resilience
and our economy primary industries and tourism rely heavily on healthy ecosystems and if the
environmental mandate is weakened those foundations erode and future generations will bear that cost
the environment act requires the ministry to consider things like ecosystem health
threatened species landscapes areas of importance to tanga to finoa pollution natural hazards
hazardous substances and cumulative effects these are not optional extras they are core stewardship
duties we are concerned that within a much larger ministry these functions would be overshadowed
by the development priorities the bill doesn't provide clarity or safeguards to show how these
tensions will be managed without explicit direction environmental protection risks becoming secondary
we also challenge the assumption that this merger will create efficiency combining such
different mandates blurs organizational purpose confuses advice to ministers shifts conflicts to
inside one agency rather than resolving them between clear specialized ministries this is
likely to slow decisions advice and internal negotiations far from creating efficiency it
risks managing making the system less effective than what we have now ww of new zealand does not
support the bill or the merger as proposed however if the merger proceeds we strongly
recommend three things first strengthen the bill so environmental functions cannot be weakened through
secondary legislation or organizational restructuring environmental protection biodiversity
and ecosystem health must be explicitly prioritized for the new priorities for the new ministry's
purpose and powers second ensure that the secretary for the environment keeps an independent
authoritative role able to give free and frank environmental advice supported by staff who have
genuine environmental expertise and experience this is particularly important in the context
of the rma replacement work which will take very many years to enact and implement third
improve transparency and accountability the annual reporting statutory environmental limits
and independent oversight must be strong enough to prevent uh environmental outcomes being
compromised to conclude al teodos environment is globally unique and under immense pressure
it needs strong clear institutional guardianship and we urge the committee to ensure the bill
and any related instruments explicitly protect the integrity of the environmental mandate
within the new ministry thank you for your time and we're happy to answer any queries
thank you very much for that submission uh pre anchor here's the first question
thank you um you've mentioned in your written submission your concerns around um
the conflicts between development and environmental protection which seems to me to be
quite similar to the trade-offs that pc has mentioned in his submission um would you go
so far as he has to say that you would suggest that mfe's left out of the measure i would
i think the transparency and visibility of those trade-offs is incredibly important
um the reason why mfe was uh you know established in the first place was to drive the quality
uh decision making and informed decision making and evidence um to fully understand
those impacts of our decisions on the environment and that that still remains an important function
just use one of them yeah um so when you say there needs to be visibility part of what he
has said is that uh the trade-offs could be then the risk is that the trade-offs would be managed
within this mega ministry and not elevated that's right two ministers and that's what you mean
by that yes the contestable advice needs to be yeah thank you so thank you very much for your
submission today we appreciate those considerations so thank you thank you
so we now move to our next submitter uh troy baseman
troy welcome to this committee this afternoon uh you have five minutes with us so uh we'll
hand it over to you to talk us through your submission thank you tenakota tenakota katawa um
thanks for hearing this um i um am an environmental scientist uh working across
science and policy i've been on mfe's uh interim limits and targets advisor group as well as the
mb group that advised um government on the science system under the last group the areas i want to
focus on here are the transparency of science and research that tells us how the environment
actually is and how it's doing with the statutory functions of the secretary of the environment
and parts that were set up under the original um environment legislation that legislation was
sort of world leading at the time and is now the norm to have a ministry for the environment
or a similar environmental agency at a top level of government um that shouldn't be a surprise to
anyone and bringing people like me to new zealand 25 years ago from ivy league universities in berkeley
or simply looking after our trade and international reputation is essential um
having the the the role of the ministry for the environment within that's essential i think
everybody can see that to some degree the question here is will this bill actually do
what it says and what can be done around um making the process here as effective as possible
i i oppose the bill um i oppose um the um this establishment of the ministry for the environment
i would have worn a tie if i believe that i could actually convince you to go back on that
however i think the more important thing here is something that amongst others the pc
has identified there are core things that happen within government and core things that are set up
in legislation where the ministry for the environment is relatively unique um my observation is that a
lot of those go badly in super ministries and that's certainly what i've observed with the
super ministries like mb that have been created i can see benefits from remixing the planning
functions of mfv with other ministries i can't see benefit benefits from disestablishing
the roles of mfv as seen in making the more invisible in a super ministry there are two big
problems to address one of which that i would really emphasize is making as much as possible
here reversible so when it's not seen as working or a different government comes in it's relatively
smooth to fix the parts that aren't working and let the parts of the merger that maybe are
working continue um one of the most important pieces of those for you to understand is the
role of the chief executive and we've now seen a chief executive appointment and that person as
has come out in the media just in the last day does not give me confidence that this is going to
proceed as planned or was successfully um there's a little more to say about that so what i'll move
to is the problem with ministries you've probably seen this before um i'll certainly leave it as
an exhibit this is the unscramble and government diagram from the new zealand initiatives and you
know how does science or reality negotiate this i would hand it to you that a lot of the problems we have
can be fixed by restructuring but the restructuring might look more like this
which is norway and in this model you might see things like climate environment and conservation
put together rather than environment as we call it now um put in with um planning and
building and transport uh i think there's some very different functions there and i support
the pce's notion that these need to have a competition at the table within cabinet
um the last thing that i worry about and i will encourage you to think about my looking
around the table i think you can understand this without me explaining it further it's it's
mentioned i know or is consistent with the new zealand initiatives unscramble and government report
and it's one of the other concerns about restructuring like this that generate super
ministries they generate accountability sinks which make government function worse rather than better
so with that i think that's really what i wanted to cover and we're close to five minutes anyway
yeah thank you troi look we do have a question from francesco
cool thank you chair uh can you elaborate on what you mean by how this new ministry could
create an accountability sink with a concrete example hypothetical example again wow um
yeah so the the typical way these accountability sinks work is that um a decision is made and
it's not clear who's responsible for the decision so let's say that that's has to do with the dipser
loop of monitoring the quality of for example freshwater and then making decisions about land
use that relate to that um if in fact we are losing track of who's supposed to be monitoring
freshwater and considering what that actually means as well as who's responsible for the return to
policy that's an accountability problem and it's already a problem because that dipser loop
does not connect back until we implement the changes the pce recommended which i think you're
still ongoing thank you very much troi for your submission today really appreciate that so thank
you yes thank you um if you could the class in a diagram is that Norway one's interesting
yeah and then the other one i think it's the ministry reports that we already have
um we now welcome our next submitter that world forest and bird society of New Zealand welcome
Richard Erica hello how are you you've got a great memory for you
look we um you have five minutes with us so we'll hand it over to you to talk us through
your submission so thank you thank you thank you for the opportunity to appear again before
my name is Erica tolman i'm acting CEO of forest and bird we are out here all is new
out here all in new zealand's independent voice for nature and we have more than a century of
experience advocating for biodiversity freshwater in the natural environment
look our position is that we do not support this bill we recognize the value of better
coordination across portfolios but disestablishing the ministry for the environment and
embedding its statutory functions within a large development oriented super ministry
creates risks that outweigh any potential administrative benefits
so we have a couple of key concerns first off is dilution of environmental leadership
so the bill transfers MEP statutory functions to a secretary within a consolidated ministry
as you're all aware in practice we say that that risk that will risk diluting time focus and
institutional weight for environmental stewardship another issue is the conflicting mandates and
weaker advice so embedding environmental statutory functions alongside mandates to
promote development transport efficiency and urban growth creates structural conflicts
and we're particularly concerned with some of the drafting here so
calls 12 of the bill amends section 32 of the environment act and it requires that the
secretary considers those environmental matters listed as far as practical now I recognize
that that wording is already in the ministry in the environment act sorry but the problem here
is that it's only going to apply to the secretary not all the officials that sit under that person
and also it is going to be weighed up in the ministry against all the other competing directions
so in our view that that will mean environmental considerations are diluted
reduce transparency and contestability you've already heard about that so I'll just
skim over that and again the defunding risk you've heard already from the last two submitters
about the potential for that I'll hand over to Richard
Hi, Kia ora everybody, I'm Richard Cappy on the Chief Advisor for Forest and Bird it's nice to see you all again
I think one of the things that we would flag for the committee is that there is some significant
timing and implementation risks here that need to be taken into account this reform has been
proposed as you will know from the mahi that you've been undertaking while the environmental
system is already undergoing massive change we've got generational changes happening to the
resource management system including two new bills and two and national directions those things are
still being designed and will take a number of years to actually embed and secure furthermore
we have significant mahi taking place where much of the rubber hits the road the regulatory
environments in our local and regional government where we are looking at potentially some
significant reforms in that space as well the risks posed by increasing this instability
should not be understated there's that old adage that forms should follow functions
we haven't actually determined what those functions fully are yet let alone tested them
yet we're looking at reshaping and fundamentally shifting a lot of the expertise
that exists in this space the institutional disruption that could take place at the very
time that you probably need that stability in order to make RM reforms and regional and local
government reform successful should not be understated you will risk losing special staff
you'll risk losing capability and you'll risk losing institutional knowledge if you want RM3
to be successful and endure then you should think very carefully about whether doing this at this
particular time is the right ideas I think it poses real risks to effective implementation
of significant changes that this government has already signaled that it wishes to take
forward so if the bill proceeds what should be the minimum safeguards I think we've already said
there should be statutory clarity and as Erica and others have said it clearly established the
role and authority of a dedicated secretary for the environment there should be strong obligations
including explicit statutory duties on the Consolidation Ministry to give effect to
environmental principles not optional or as far as practicable there should be
reinfenced funding transparent dedicated funding lines for environmental functions
and there should be visible contestable advice mechanisms to ensure that environmental advice
remains independence in practice and clearly visible to ministers parliament and public
finally I think at a practical level there are there are drafting improvements that would need
to be made and would you know suggest that the work done by EDS and around this makes a good
starting point in summary I think we're pretty clear that the committee should recommend against
the bill in this current form I think that risk around being able to drive forward RM3 is really
critical and one that I haven't seen picked up or given due consideration if you were to proceed
I think the PCE is correct keep MFE out certainly at this point in time we would agree with
Parliamentary Commissioner on that but we would have concerns about the two pills being split
across the ministry so keeping part in with MFE and the risk of insert or insert or the could
because we've already flagged quite deep concerns about actually the the problematic nature of
having two pieces of legislation for RM3 in the first place the reality is and I guess I'm
talking to the members of the coalition in a sense but if you're looking for efficiency and you're
looking for affordability and you're looking for effectiveness there are better ways to achieve
that you can strengthen environmental leadership rather than subsume it there are intimate
interdepartmental boards and strength of coordination mechanisms that could be put in place
thank you for your time happy to answer any questions thank you Richard and Erica for
that very clear submission Rachel has a question yeah just if you can spend a tiny little bit more
time on the relationship to what you're calling RM3 and that is the planning bill being separate from
the natural environment bill and the integration of the resource management system and environment
in the system and how things with this sure so we have serious concerns about the ability or
actually inability to to do integrated management with the way that the two bills have been separated
biodiversity is one issue that is very tricky to follow through the two bills and ensure that
actually protections are going to be one effective for the environment and two
actually efficient for resource users and that is we can't see a way to easily fix that we weren't
able to suggest any any fixes in our submissions on those bills because of the in our view
arbitrary split between land and environment they are the same thing and in our view should be
managed as one the PC had suggested I think if I understand that submission correctly
that those two bills could be managed by different
administering agencies we would not agree with that for the for the reasons that I've just
okay well thank you very much and Lan actually one quick question go for it I don't know if it's
quick question I'm not sure if you caught hearings earlier this morning but we had
Professor Bronwyn Hayward from University of Canterbury talking about she really struggled to
find international examples where these kind of mergers have actually taken place and then had
better outcomes for the environment are you aware with your kind of international colleagues
and agencies around the world where I guess things like this might have had better
momentum outcomes it's not something I'm aware of so I've worked in a number of different jurisdictions
and I've looked at a number of different other jurisdictions and their approaches it's not
something I've come across I don't think it's been flagged in any of reports by officials okay
no thank you thank you very much thank you very much thanks so we will now move to our next
submitter Zoran Rakovic who is joining us online and Zoom online yeah
oh there we go we can see you Zoran welcome to this committee this afternoon
we'll hand it over to you you have five minutes with us for your submission so over to you
thank you madam chair members of the committee thank you for the chance to speak my name is
Zoran Rakovic I'm a retired structural engineer from Selwyn and my submission is less of an experts
view than more of a common it's more of a common sense than layperson's
view Selwyn is one of the fastest growing districts in the country so what you are deciding here will
land directly in our communities I'm not necessarily against merging ministries if it means housing
transport and environment are finally working together that could be a good thing but here's
the risk in simple terms when you put everything into one big department the pressure to get things
built can start to outweigh the need to get things right and in a place like Selwyn that matters
we are growing fast Rolleston Lincoln Prebleton new houses new subdivisions that puts pressure on
storm water flood protection groundwater and roads if those things aren't properly planned upfront
the problems don't disappear they show up later flooding water quality issues
bigger costs to fix infrastructure that should have been done properly the first time
and who pays local ratepayers that's the real issue not growth itself but unfunded or poorly
planned growth this bill says the functions stay the same just moved to a different structure
but structure matters it affects priorities it affects how decisions are made day to day
if environmental expertise gets diluted even slightly those trade-offs won't be as visible
so my ask is simple if you're going to merge these agencies put some guard guard rails in place
make sure there are still strong environmental experts in the system make sure decisions are
transparent so people can see how trade-offs are made and make sure that if development is sped up
the cost of things like drainage flood protection and water systems is properly accounted for not
pushed onto existing communities later because they are the reality is very simple water still
flows downhill pipes still have limits flood plains still flood changing the structure in
Wellington doesn't change that if this reform helps things line up better great but if it leads to
cutting corners selwyn will be the one paying for it thank you thank you very much Zoran for
that submission we appear to have no further questions on that but we appreciate you taking
the time to submit to us today so thank you very much appreciate your time thank you clear
submission so thank you look we're now going to move to southern young labor there we are we can
see you there welcome to the select committee this afternoon thank you madam chair here five minutes
with us so we'll hand it over to you to talk us through your submission thank you gotta go to
and thank you for allowing me the opportunity to speak to our behalf of southern young labor
my name is Liam Calder and I'm the vice president and on behalf of southern young labor we strongly
oppose the environment or the disestablishment of the ministry of environment amendment bill
as representatives of rung a tahi across the lower south island we speak for a generation
that will live with the long-term consequences from the decisions that are made within the
select committee room environmental governance is not abstract to us but it is the future that we
will inherit this bill proposes to disestablish this disestablish the ministry of environment
at a time when coordinated long-term environmental leadership is more critical than ever the
ministry of environment plays a central role in providing independent advice coordinating across
governments a coordinating across elections even and ensuring consistency and environmental policy
without it responsibility can remain fragmented decision-making risks become inconsistent
less transparency and more vulnerable to short-term political pressures for young people this is
deeply concerning environmental challenges operate on decades long timelines yet this bill weakens
the institutional capacity needed to plan beyond just three-year electoral cycles the environment
should not be used as a political football to streamline government we are already seeing the
impacts of climate change in particular regions that southern young labor represent especially
across otago in southland coastal communities infrastructure and primary industries are
increasingly exposed effective responses require coordination and leadership not institutional
retreat weakening environmental institutions does not support growth it creates uncertainty and
risks damaging to new zealand's clean green international reputation finally this bill
sends a message to young people that environmental protection is negotiable secondary or even push
decide for many of us climate change is a defining issue of our time weakening environmental
leaderships risks deepening political disengagement and eroding trust in public institutions
therefore on behalf of southern young labor we recommend that the committee rejects this bill
on the grounds that the disestablishment of the ministry environment would create
environmental violations that could be brushed under the carpet or lost within the new ministries
of cities environments regions and transport we also believe the secretary environment would not
be sufficient or carry any political or legislative power to protect something that relies on a
voice for protection while we commend this attempt to introduce checks and balances
we believe that this does not go far enough at a time of escalating environmental risk
new zealand needs stronger leadership not less we need robust institutions long-term thinking
and commitment to our future generations our message is simple do not dismantle the structures
that protect our future and our mokopuna's future namahe thank you thank you very much
for that submission and for the lovely graphics as well on the submission there look we're going to
take one question from an MP who may be known to you right she'll brookin from the south
nice to see you and the graphics for anybody watching this beautiful picture of their clock tower
from the university of otago and it comes to the best electorate but Liam you've talked a lot
in the submission about the difference between short-term thinking and long-term thinking and so
why is it that long-term thinking is important to southern young labor long-term thinking is
many of us join southern young labor for a very transient period in our lives
may whether it's three years at university or they could be here for long-term in southern
young labor but potentially we could be inheriting a future that goes just beyond our lifetimes
it goes back to the saying of we plant the tree that we'll never feel the shade of
it's all about protecting um something that doesn't necessarily have a voice for itself
and that's why believe that's why southern young labor believes in standing up for the
environment for the long-term um shades that we won't feel the um the tree that we won't feel
the shade of beautifully said thank you very much Liam for your submission appreciate your time
this afternoon thank you thank you very much a kaki too bye bye
so we now move to our next submission uh Nelson Tasman Climate Forum
who will also be joining us online this afternoon
Fred welcome to the select committee this afternoon you have five minutes with us so
we'll hand it over to you to talk us through your submission thank you thank you madame chair
tene koutou katoa uh col fredo mtockel enoa uh with me today is david barthel here's a bug so
i'll be the main speaker um we speak on behalf of the nelson tasman climate forum and we thank
you for this important opportunity to present to you today in that presentation while we acknowledge
value and improve public service integration we'll make the case that mfe is the government's
primary advisor on climate and environment need strengthening and that it's proposed
emergence through this bill in a new msert we'll have the opposite effect and we'll generate
higher costs we're now on the cusp of 1.5 degrees c of global temperature rise
scientific evidence shows that global heating is accelerating some predict two degrees c by 2040
unless urgent action is taken for humanity to change course we're now rapidly approaching
model earth tipping points that will transform our world with devastating and irreversible
consequences of people in nature for example collapse of the greenland and western tower
advice sheets global permafrost store and slow down of the atlantic radial overturning circle
circulation um otherwise in short known as amok because earth's climate system is interconnected
our terror new zealand will not be immune to these consequences for example sea level rise
and the warming of our oceans as amok declines
the increasing frequency of severe weather events most notably the often anniversary weekend floods
and cycling three or three years ago but as we've also seen in the summer as a summer of storms
with tragic loss of lives likelihoods and massive economic costs well in hindsight
looked relatively benign events noting its significance to yourselves as decision makers
we stress the point in our written submission that the most that most current economic
assessments splude many of the real world impacts of climate change such as these tipping points
sea level rise mass migration human health impacts and geopolitical risks
it's now unequivocal that the cost of climate inaction but exceeds the cost of taking climate
action we know a recent uk climate change committee report finding the last couple of weeks
that reaching net zero by 2050 would be cheaper for the uk than the single fossil fuel spike
of 2022 associated with the ukraine war in short we see a strong case for strengthening
the mfb as a government's primary advisor on climate and environment to help us navigate the turbulent times of
him the key foundation and all of that will be achieving net negative emissions
we fear under the bill that climate and environment will be submerged in the new msir while the
ceo will have the title of secretory environment and practice based on the budget allocations of
msir's constituents and excluding industrial ets allocations that in reality are subsidies to
climate pollution we estimate climate and environment be a little more than 6 percent of the ceo's
responsibilities to suggest that there will still be a secret between the environment is confusing
at best critically the merger will submerge decisions of boundary judgments trade-offs
between safe long-term environments and climate and largely short-term development considerations
maintaining transparency openness and a sense of public ownership and environment of policy is
a great deal without a dedicated point of contact public participation trusts will likely plummet
we see potential for disruption to current priorities such as the new painting legislation
climate adaptation legislation and revision of the net of the national adaptation plan
trade partners such as the EU who cherish their environmental record will be dismayed by the
change to conclude the now-sentencing climate forum strongly poses the
disistension of the ministering environment for reasons of transparency and accountability in
this role for restoring a climate protecting nature to tigh down and protecting future generations
however if the committee is on my to recommend the bill proceed and in the departure from
our written submission we recommend fully following the environmental law initiative proposal
to establish the secretary for the environment as deputy chief executive of the new ministry
with an exclusive mandate and sufficient resources for its climate and environment
responsibilities and to provide direction that the new ministry must prioritize
our national climate obligations and environmental outcomes across all functions
thank you madam chair we welcome any questions thank you very much fred look you have met time
with that submission so there aren't any further questions but look we thank you for your time
today and it doesn't actually look like Nelson they're behind you either
I'm sure it's sunny down there today
yes thank you
so now we welcome our next submitter uh parliamentary commissioner for the environment
and I understand uh the team is here and we have Simon joining us online from afar
as well so just to acknowledge you all here today we'll just wait for Simon
commissioner to pop up he popped up and then popped away again
and he's coming and going you have a problem there we go welcome commissioner
and welcome all to the select committee uh you have 10 minutes with us on this so we'll
hand it over to you to talk us through your submission so thank you thanks madam chair there's
no right way to arrange government departments so anything can be made to work and if you want
to get rid of the ministry for the environment this is from a legal point of view an elegant way
so that's good however in my view a separate ministry remains the best way to ensure that
environmental problems are properly addressed unlike domains such as transport housing or
infrastructure where there are numerous private and public owners operators and interest groups
the environment doesn't have anyone that can claim to own it all of us are dependent on the
environment of which we're apart now in my view it makes sense to have an agency whose job it is
to ensure that the consequences for the environment of all our other policy interventions are
properly understood if we can justify a separate ministry for regulation we can certainly justify
a separate ministry for the environment now as the officer of parliament charged with
keeping under review the system of processes and agencies that make up our environmental
management system my advice to you is that this change is unlikely to help the environment
and I want to underline three points briefly first bundling these agencies together undermines an
important principle of public sector advice and that is the need for contestability so that
elected officials in other words ministers not public servants can confront and make the big
trade-offs there's a real risk with a mega ministry that trade-offs will be resolved
within the organization and that the differences will not be aired with ministers
where accountability for those trade-offs should rightly sit now neither the previous nor the current
government have made a convincing case in my view that to reform the rma you need two acts but if
you are all agreed that that's the right approach then surely it would make sense to have
different ministries responsible for the two different acts to ensure that the trade-offs between
them are properly presented frankly I don't have a lot of confidence in large internal bureaucratic
trade-off exercises a ministry for the environment overseeing a natural environment act would better
ensure free and frank advice than a mega ministry trying to reach a compromise it hopes all of
its ministers can swallow there's also a transparency point that you as a select committee should
seek advice on right now the ministry for the environment has two appropriations one for
environment one for climate you need to find out in this merged ministry if there is going to be
an appropriation for those things with my ee which i bring to you once a year my
estimate of environmental expenditure i could tell you what's being spent on those items
from the budget i may not be able to do so anywhere in years so easily if this is all
just put into a big blender and you can't see what's being spent on the environment
okay my second point if you believe that a smaller number of mega ministries is better
then you should at least be prepared to consider merging mfe with mpi now that may shock some
people and it's not my first preference after all many of our most pressing environmental
problems are associated with primary industries like water quality greenhouse gas emissions and
erosion so i suppose there could be a problem for free and frank advice about those problems
if you put those together but look at it another way the current proposal is to create a very
urban focused ministry it seems to have been the inspiration of people who live in cities
and see the environment as being all about cars and houses and urban design and infrastructure
but the vast bulk of the natural environment is outside of cities most of new zealand is
rural and i think rural people are much closer to the natural environment they work in it
forests farms vineyards they all rely directly on the health of the environment and climate
and mpi understands that it's got serious technical capabilities in areas like biosecurity and animal
health that are much closer to the natural environment than people advising on how many
apartments you can squeeze around a bus stop now i worry that this agency won't understand rural
new zealand and the people who live and work there in short the merger facilitated by this
bill treats the environment as though it were a branch of planning law it isn't the environment
intersects with every corner of public policy which brings me to my third and final point
if ever there was a time to avoid an upheaval it's in the middle of a massive legislative reform
which you as a committee are overseeing officials will already have their hands full
trying to make complex new legislation work and develop national direction across a bewildering
array of topics it's the worst time for people to be sizing up new managers and reapplying for
their jobs furthermore the government has decided to upend regional councils which will cause even more
uncertainty for the implementation of new law and as i've said in respect to that reform
form should follow function the same applies here if there's a need to tinker with the
departmental lego set it should happen after new functions have been determined and
legislated for so there you are that is my frank advice to you on this initiative well thank you
Simon for that very passionate submission look you've opened up a flurry of questions around the
table here so look we will start with Rachel well we know that we can always rely on a frank advice
thank you but i've just got one question to start with and that is you're talking about this
contestability and ministers going head-to-head on issues and the word trade-off is used a lot and
i know it's one i use a lot as well but can you give us some examples of the type of trade-offs
that you are imagining there it's an unlimited number and i'm sure you can imagine them but you
take transport for instance you've got climate consequences you've got congestion consequences
you've got economic consequences you've got social consequences what's public what's private
or you take you know water you need water for irrigation you need water for drinking you need
water to protect the ecology these these are all complicated issues where different parts of our
society you know whether we're urban dwellers or rural whether after water for industry or we're
trying to protect you know local park or whatever we've all got claims on this thing called the
environment and the environment hasn't got anyone who can say well actually i own the environment
and i can give you my view you need a ministry or what if you're going to have this mega one you
need a very clearly defined entity that can provide specific advice on the environment
and if i ever just underline this point again if you can't even tell how much money you're spending
on that in a in a blurred ministry i think you should be concerned thank you and francesco thank
you chair um would you agree with the advice that the government has gotten around this um that
given the proposed agency would be development oriented there's a particular risk of environment
functions and perspectives being lost and if you agree with that how would you recommend
them mitigate that inevitably there will be that that tension brought in house that tension
exists i remind you right now around the cabinet table where ministers are discussing things
what as i've just said what you're doing by pulling this all together is that you make the
tensions in the trade-offs less transparent there isn't uh an agency which can give clear advice
just from an environmental point of view we all accept they have to be trade-offs and we all
accept that the development will involve trade-offs we need to know what they are it needs to come
from an agency that can provide that uh clearly and transparently i think it's easiest done if
you have a separate ministry for the environment thank you thank you simon look we'll go to grant now
yeah you get a simon um you highlight the for example um well the new ministry uh the
superminister understand rural new zealand okay if we end up this is where we if that's where we
end up with the new ministry which is where we're heading how how what advice could you give to
help prevent that happening any thoughts in that space i don't have advice for that because i
think you make it very difficult for yourselves um you will have an entity which is heavily focused
on the spatial planning side of things and the urban side now look that is important
you've heard me be critical of two acts but you know one good thing about spatial planning
is that we can bring stuff together the problem is that you have put that in an agency alongside
the entity which is looking after the environment and a lot of that rural stuff you've put that all
together so it's it's hard to see why the the weight of stuff won't go in that direction
this is just a straight contestability issue um and i i'm not i wasn't being facetious when i said
why not look at mpi mfe i mean i can understand the case for wanting fewer ministries i mean fewer
chief executive salaries i suppose few few a few other things but you know rural new zealand
is living face to face with all of those challenges around water and my diversity and so on so forth
you know and i actually i'm very impressed by mpi in many ways i think it's an agency with
serious technical skill whatever technical skill exists inside this ministry won't be technical
skill around the natural environment in the way that an agency like mpi can bring to the table
so i think but again if you're going to go down this road i think it's very important that you can
see transparently what the appropriation is for environment and also for climate by the way
so you know what's being spent and you can drill this this major domo who's going to be running
at all the chief executive you can drill that person on okay how are you mobilizing the
resources we're giving you for the environment if that's all lost in a single appropriation i think
your job gets even harder as a select committee i might just jump in there Simon because you
talked about departmental lego set i mean i suppose the point of this is to bring everything
together in one so that there's less duplication it's more streamlined it's a bit more efficiency
so i'm hearing from you that you're not necessarily opposed to that kind of merges into
one to create more efficiency but just not with transport housing and environment that's not where
you think it should so is that is that am i correct in saying that absolutely as i said right in the
beginning there's no right to way to arrange government departments but i mean you could ask
the question why isn't lunes part of this merger i mean this land information new zealand spatial
planning information this is all logically connected i think it's the wrong way to think about it
how could we arrange the lego i'd look at form and function you know what are you trying to achieve
what the government's currently trying to achieve through spatial planning is integrating
some very important functions and i think that this ministry could do that well
but it's also trying to achieve something environmental which is a bit different and
so keeping those two apart i think would be a better plan okay thank you so one last question
from pre anchor just super quick since you've suggested alternative saman we had a submitter
who suggested that mfv climate change and doc could go together what are your thoughts on that
i don't agree with that doc is an operational department you know it's a big big big land
manager and it needs a lot of of of real technical advice and land management advice now they're
looking after tracks they're looking after tourism concessions all of that stuff it is a real
operational department what we're talking about here are policy departments and i think it's a question
the of deciding what policy areas you should pull together and you there may will be other
agencies you could put with mfe if you wanted to but i wouldn't recommend that one actually i
think it's chalk and cheese look thank you very much simon and to your team for the submission
today we've heard that your message loud and clear so thank you for that
so we're now going to move into private session that ends our